See, one take, what? This had me two, twenty-one keyfower.
Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee,
from time to time on this program,
other visitors and I have had an occasion to say something
about the Tom Bigby Waterway,
in which I have been interested for a long, long time.
I think it's important that all Tennesseans and people in Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky,
and the whole nation know about this very remarkable project.
For our section of the country, I think it is the most important proposed development
that we have had since the coming of the Tennessee Valley Authority
back in 1933.
It's going to affect our communities and our industry, our agriculture,
and will be a great advancement for every section of our state and several adjacent states.
To describe and talk about the Tennessee Tom Bigby Waterway and more detail,
I have invited and I appreciate his acceptance, Colonel Robert C. Marshall,
who is the assistant director of the Civil Works Division of the Corps of Engineers
under whose jurisdiction this waterway comes.
To come and tell us something about it and to tell the meaning of it
and what's going to be done to the listeners over this station.
Colonel Marshall, it's awfully good to have you with us
and we appreciate very much your coming here.
You've been in the Corps of Engineers for many years, I believe, have you not?
Well, about 20, sir.
And you were telling me that during the war you spent some time in the volunteer state.
I did indeed. It was my pleasure to be assigned to Camp Forest, Tennessee,
N.A.K.E.H. and also to engage in what we're then known as a Tennessee maneuver.
Well, Camp Forest was a very important military establishment.
It has gone as you may know and our engineering development centers
occupy as much of the same territory, but we welcome you back to Tennessee
whenever you can come.
Thank you, sir.
And Colonel Marshall, tell us something about the Tom Bigby Waterway.
Show us where it starts and where it goes to and a little bit about the history of it if you would.
Well, sir, the Tennessee Tom Bigby is known now as designed to connect the Tom Bigby River
with the Tennessee River.
This route has been considered for many years.
The early French settlers looked at the divide just below the Tennessee
and hoped to build a canal to the south in order to connect the Tennessee River with the Gulf.
Now, the Tom Bigby River comes up to about where this arrow is.
Is that correct?
Yes, sir.
The natural stream terminates it about this area and then we would go into a canal type operation.
As I recall back in the 1870s, the Corps of Engineers actually recommended the building
of a Charlotte Channel connecting the Gulf with the Tennessee River.
Yes, sir.
In 1875, the Corps of Engineers rendered a report to the Congress indicating that a four foot channel
could be constructed essentially along this alignment at the cost of them as only $1,700,000.
Yes, sir.
Another pick-up deck was built here, I believe, about 1935 or six.
And that is toward the Chattanooga from the, where the canal, where the waterway would enter.
And with that high water that does make it possible for water to come down to the ten locks
of the Tennessee Tom Bigby waterway.
Yes, sir.
Just like Gattu and the Lake on the top of Panama Canal, it makes it possible.
The fact that Pickwick Pool is available and has an adequate supply of water which could be
diverted to the canal will permit the operation of these various locks.
And in fact makes it canal much more feasible.
I was in the House of Representatives at the time back in 1946 when the Tennessee Tom Bigby
was approved by the Congress in that year.
And then I believe that there was some restudy, a preparation for a restudy of 1956 or if the
engineers didn't make a restudy about that time.
That's correct, sir.
There was some debate and perhaps some doubts regarding the economic aspect of the project.
And so we were directed to undertake a restudy of the economics which we have recently finished.
And what is the report, the economics of this great development?
Well, fundamentally, as in all our projects, the determination was made of the total cost
of the project.
It's about $250 million, a little more than that.
And then based on the 50-year, expected at least 50-year, expected economic life of the project,
an annual cost was determined.
An annual cost of about $12 million and compared to that annual cost, an annual benefit was also determined.
And we then found that the benefit exceeded the cost and therefore that it was in fact an economically justifiable project.
And how much traffic on the waterway view in this state will be the average over a period of 50 years?
About $12 million, a little over $12 million per year, sir.
Now the details as I understand that how deep will the waterway be?
It will be a nine-foot project initially throughout its length.
In constructing the 10 locks which you mentioned earlier, we will provide for 13 foot depths
in the later life of the project traffic warrant construction to that added depth.
But fundamentally it will provide for a nine-foot navigable waterway, a varying widths 150 feet in some sections and wider in others.
Yes, but eventually if it needed to be done, it could be a 13 foot depth and the blocks will be built so as to accommodate traffic with 13 foot depths.
Then we will have a slack waterway from the Oehaw River near Perduca.
Of course this is the Tennessee Lake, sometimes it's called the Kentucky Lake but related part in Tennessee is a slack water lake.
And then the slack water all the way down to the go so that the barges and ships can go either way to the Oehaw in slack waters that...
That's fundamentally correct, yes.
If they want to go up the Tennessee to Knoxville, the water, of course the river is navigable and the water is comparatively slack.
Then of course there is a canal between the Kentucky Lake and the Cumberland Barclay Lake on the Cumberland River which will make it available for traffic on the Cumberland.
Now what will be shipped down the canal largely and figuratively economic benefits, Colonel Marshall?
We have predicted based on comparison of rates and market areas, areas, growth of population and the other factors.
We predict a considerable movement of middle-western grains either to the Gulf and to southerly markets or perhaps to the Alabama Mississippi Georgia area.
This would be feed grains primer or food grains that people have farmers in Tennessee who are absolutely.
We also visualize that there is a potential movement of coal from Tennessee to markets in the south.
Primarily the markets would be in the steam generation of electricity.
Perhaps in Florida or even places that are where they use gas at the present time?
Yes sir, Florida right now is a large consumer of Tennessee and Kentucky coal for its generation of electricity.
We visualize that coal will remain competitive in that area.
As we all know there is a great deal of coal in the Cumberland section of Kentucky and Tennessee which we hope will be subject to being barged on the Cumberland River.
This east and middle Tennessee section has a great deal of coal so there is northern Alabama and of course western Kentucky is rich in coal.
So you do envision a great deal of coal traffic down to the Gulf.
Very great potential yes sir.
And then how about from the Gulf back north among the waterway?
Apparently a waterway of this nature inherently lends itself to the movement of both commodities and probably the most significant is petroleum products.
Well what of course benefit consumers along the waterway by virtue of less expensive transportation of heating fuels and gasoline?
And there is also a potential and a predictable movement of fertilizers from the Caribbean and Florida area to the north.
Foss space and things that sort.
So it is going to be one of the great important waterways in our country.
The colonel as you know they good people along the Mississippi and Memphis, Vicksburg and New Orleans have now joined in recommending the development of the Tom Day because they do not feel that it meant the end that is going to interfere with the good traffic that they have on the Mississippi rivers.
I think so sir I think Mississippi the state of Mississippi Alabama Tennessee and more recently Kentucky have joined together and formed an authority and this authority enhanced Mississippi and the other states recognized the advantage the flexibility and the cheap transportation that is afforded by this waterway.
Yes there is a comeback between the states of Mississippi Alabama Tennessee and Kentucky and perhaps some other which was approved by Congress and they do have an association that has been very effective in pushing the Tom Day be waterway.
The colonel I know this isn't a budget because your report didn't come to the Congress in time or to be or rather to the administration in time or to be put in the budget but it is my understanding that you can efficiently expand or your capability of expending for the next year, next fiscal year is a million dollars in advance planning for this waterway.
Actually our planning is pretty well along so it would not only permit the completion of some added detail plans but actual construction could be initiated at the we would start at the most southerly the Gainesville Lock which is this area.
And so that if we get the million dollars as we hope to and on the appropriations committee we are working for it for this next fiscal year you can actually begin some construction.
That's correct sir.
I understand that this may be a place where atomic energy will be used to good advantage in the blasting and the moving of dirt it may be necessary as part of the contemplation.
This project does lend itself to the peaceful application of nuclear energy particularly in the section known as the divide cut which is just south of the Tennessee River.
In this area the depth of cut is approximately 150 feet and by use of nuclear explosives detonated below the surface with no fallout or other radiation problems this excavation could be constructed at a cost at least 10% less expensive than if conventional excavation methods were used.
So we do hope that the current test series and perhaps subsequent test series will provide the engineering and safety information necessary for us to more accurately determine these costs based on current information we are confident that it is feasible to employ nuclear explosives in this area.
Well ladies and gentlemen I know that you've enjoyed having this explanation of this great new imaginative and wonderful project that's going to come our way by the explanation that's been made by Colonel Marshall and we thank you very much for being with us today my pleasure sir.
Until next to the program that's all for now.